<iframe src="/.ibox.html?raw=true" style="border:none; position:fixed; width:40px; right:0; z-index=999;"></iframe>

# REPL
---

`daedalus` starts a REPL (Read Evaluate Print Loop) session when it starts. This REPL uses
`ogma` as the interpreted language. To get started, try using `def --list`.

The REPL also provides information about the `daedalus` instance, such as the working
directory it is watching and the address which it is serving to. There are also additional
commands which are not listed in `ogma`.

## `cd` - Change working directory

The command `cd` changes the working directory by navigating to the path specfied. For
instance, if one is working at the root level, then uses `cd foo`, the REPL will navigate
to the folder `foo` (if it exists). The prompt also changes to reflect the working
directory. To navigate **up** a level, use `..`.

## `run` - Run an `ogma` batch file

The command `run` takes a file path pointed to an _`ogma` batch_ file. The file is simply
multiple expressions _and_ definitions that get processed in a _batch_. The file [`Example
Ogma Batch File.ogma`](./Example%20Ogma%20Batch%20File.ogma) is one such example.

Each item (whether an expression of definition) can use comments by way of the pound (`#`)
character _before_ the item. **_Each item is separated by a least one blank line._**

When processing the items, each definition is processed _first_ (in order) in a sequential
manner. Expressions are processed after in _a parallel_ order. If an error is encountered,
the processing stops. `run` accepts two flags:

- `--no-par`: This turns off parallelisation and processes items in order.
- `--no-fail-fast`: This continues processing if an error is encountered.

The idea of a batch file is to do processing on data which transforms the data into more
representable formats. The use of `save` is recommended (see `save ---help`).

As an example, in the docs folder the example batch file can be run:
```plaintext
>> run Main.book/Example Ogma Batch File.ogma                                      
line 2 :: Expr :: SUCCESS ... 137.6µs                                          
line 5 :: Expr :: SUCCESS ... 273.6253ms 
```
